Various Notes
- Family
- Kinship
- Marriage
- Community Groups
- Households
- Generations
- Farming


Family (read Marriage below)

  Is a group of people affiliated by (one of):
  - consanguinity (by recognized birth)
  - affinity (by marriage)
  - co-residence/shared consumption (see Nurture kinship)

  In most societies, it is the main institution for the socialization of
  children.  In societies with a sexual division of labour, marriage (and
  the resulting relationship between two people) is necessary for the
  formation of an economically productive household.

  Before postmodern family, marriages were arranged for economic, social,
  or political gain.  Children were expected to contribute to family income.

  Types:
  - matrifocal (a mother and her children)
  - conjugal (a husband, his wife, and their children) aks nuclear family
  - avuncular (a brother, his sister, and her children)
  - extended family (parents and children co-reside with other members of
    one of the parent's family)

  Residence
  - Matrilocal: when the family resides with or near the wife's parents.
    Thus, multiple generations of the female offspring live in the "same
    place".  For visiting marriage, the children live with their mother.
    This type of residence is found most often in horticultural soceities.
    In partriarchal societies, the brothers are the authority figures, not
    the women.
  - Patrilocal: when the family resides with or near the husband's parents.
    The wife joins her husband in his father's home or compound.  Families
    living in a patrilocal residence generally assume joint ownership of
    domestic sources.  The household is led by a senior member, who also
    directs the labour of all other members.

  Primotgeniture dictates that the eldest son inherits the family estate
  and younger sons had to leave home and seek their own employment.  It
  maintains family estates over generations by permitting only one heir
  per generation.

  Family size declined (in the U.S.) between 1800 and 1900 from 7.0 to 3.5
  children.  In 1900, six to nine of every 1000 women died in childbirth,
  and one in five children died during the first 5 years of life.


Kinship

  Rules of descent:
  - Bilateral - an individual affiliates more or less equally with relatives
    on both parents.
  - Unilineal - an individual affiliates with relatives from one parent.
    - Patrilineal - male; most societies are patrilineal.
    - Matrilineal - female; many societies that practice this system often
      haven a patrilocal residence and men exercising significant authority.
      The descent group includes the mother's brother.
  - Ambilineal (or Cognatic) - an individual affiliates with relatives from
    one of their parents (usually choosing which side).
  - Double Descent - an individual affiliates with each set of relatives,
    but for different purposes.

  Clan: A clan is generally a descent group claiming common descent from an
  apical ancestor.  (Parentage detail are often not important.)  Non-human
  apical ancestors are called totems.

  Lineage: A unilineal descent group that can demonstrate their common
  descent from a known apical ancestor.

  Phatry: A descent group composed of two or more clans, each of whose
  apical ancestors are descended from a further common ancestor.

  Moiety: When a society is divided into exactly two descent groups.  If
  the halves are obliged to marry out (into the other), these are called
  matrimonial moieties.

  House society: In some societies, kinship and political relations are
  organized around membership in corporately organized dwellings (rather
  than descent groups or lineages).  Property, genealogy, and residence
  are not the basis for the group's existence.


Marriage:

  Marriage is a socially or ritually recognized union or legal contract
  between spouses that establishes rights and obligations between them
  and their childre, and between them and their in-laws.

  Endogamy - marriage within one's own tribe or similar unit.

  Exogamy - marriage to a person belonging to another tribe, clan, or
  similar social unit.

  Affinity (aka in-laws) is the kinship relationship which each partner
  in a marriage has to the relations of the other partner.  Affinity does
  not always cease with divorce or the death of one of the partners.
  It can sometimes include kinship by adoption and step relationship.

  Consanguinity is a "blood" kinship relationship.

  There is wide cross-cultural variation in the social rules governing the
  select of partner for marriage.  In many societies, the choice of of
  partner is limited to suitable persons from specific social groups (can
  be Endogamy or Exogamy).  With few exceptions, marriage between parents
  and children or between full siblings is forbidden.

  Marriages between more distant relatives has been common, with one
  estimate being that 80% of all marriages in history have been between
  second cousins or closer.

  Visiting marriage is when the husband and wife live apart (with their
  separate families), seeing each other in their spare time.

  Polygamy is a form of plural marriage (more than 2 people).
  - Polgyny: A man is allowed more than one wife.
  - Polyandry: A woman is allowed more than one husband.  This is rather
    rare.  More likely in societies with scarce environmental resources.
    Fraternal polyandry (brothers marrying one woman) allows land to be
    inherited by all children/heirs of brothers without dividing up the
    land plot.
  - Group marriage: Usually consists of 3-6 adults, all partners live
    together, share finances, children, and household responsibilities.
    The most common form is a triad (with at least one member of the
    opposite gender).
  - Line marriage: A form of marriage (found in fiction) where the family
    may add new spouses over time so the marriage does not end.

  During early middle ages, average age of marriage was early twenties,
  for both genders.  As more land became cultivated and during the high
  and late middle ages, women increasingly married in their teens, leading
  to higher birth rates.  Women were married once they reached reproductive
  age, but men needed independent means (to provide for their family)
  before they married so the average for men remained high (mid to late
  twenties).


Community Groups:

  Sizes:
  - Small = bands = 30-50
  - Medium = culturage lineage groups = 100-200
  - Large = tribes = 500-2500

  Dunbar has argued that 150 would be the mean group size only for
  communities with a very high incentive to remain together.  In dispersed
  societies, individuals will meet less often and be less familiar with
  each other, so group sizes would be smaller.  Thus, the 150-member group
  would only occur because of absolute necessity (intense environmental and
  economic pressures).

  In Ireland, the basis for aristocratic medieval social organization was
  the sept, a clan that could comprise as many as 250 households, or 1250
  individuals, all somehow related.


Households:

  Household work includes housework (e.g., laundry, cleaning) and carework
  (e.g., child care, elder care).

  U.S. definition: A household includes all the persons who occupy a housing
  unit. A housing unit is a house, an apartment, a mobile home, a group of
  rooms, or a single room that is occupied (or if vacant, is intended for
  occupancy) as separate living quarters. Separate living quarters are those
  in which the occupants live and eat separately from any other persons in
  the building and which have direct access from the outside of the building
  or through a common hall. The occupants may be a single family, one person
  living alone, two or more families living together, or any other group of
  related or unrelated persons who share living arrangements. (People not
  living in households are classified as living in group quarters.)

  Most economic theories assume only one income stream to a household, but
  many households include multiple income-earning members.

  There is not always a one-to-one relationship between households and
  families.

  Household Work Strategies:
  (3 domains of employment)
  - market economy (includes home-based and self-employment jobs): in order
    to obtain money to buy goods and services in the market
  - domestic production work (e.g., raising chickens, vegetable gardening):
    to supply food to the household
  - domestic consumption work (e.g., cooking meals, child-care, household
    repairs): to provide goods and services directly within the household


Generations:

  Generation time is the average time between two consecutive generations
  in the lineages of a population.  Typically 20-30 years in humans.

  One of the ways to determine generation time is the average age of
  mothers at the birth of their daughters.  A father-son distance could
  be used.  Or a parent-child distance.

  Another method of generation time is the age at which members of a given
  birth cohort are expected to reproduce.


Farming

  Hunter/gatherer needed about 10 square miles per person.  California's
  lushest landscape (coast of Santa Barbara) supported 1.5 people per
  square mile.

  Two acres in a mild temperate region is enough work to wear out a person
  and enough room to comfortably support a family of four with a variety
  of food sources (gardens, orchards, small livestock, and wild crafting).
  Modern small scale agriculture, probably bio-intensive methods.

  From a post, 1.9 acre per person living in a sustainable village
  (1.9 acre * 140 people = 266 acres)
  - 0.6250 acre of farmland/person		87.5   farmland
  - 0.0892 acre of farmland to be sold/person	12.488 farmland
  - 0.2321 acre of living area/person		32.494 living
  - 0.0214 acre of wine vineyards/person	 2.996 vineyard
  - 0.0714 acre of ponds/person			 9.996 pond
  - 0.0214 acre of coffee/person		 2.996 coffee
  - 0.0071 acre of teas/person			  .994 tea
  - 0.0142 acre of herbs/person			 1.988 herbs
  - 0.1428 acre of schools/person		19.992 schools
  - 0.2142 acre of park & wildlife/person	29.988 park & wildlife
  - 0.1428 acre of village square/person	19.992 village square
  - 0.1785 acre of livstock/person		24.99  livestock
  - 0.1392 acre of roads & ect/person 		19.488 roads, etc.

  Standard a century ago (and in India today), 8 acres per person.

  Hardwoods average yield, depending on the region, is 1/3 a cord per
  acre per year.  A cord of wood is 4x4x8 (128 cubic feet).  A cord of
  air dried, dense hardwood (oak, hickory, etc.) weighs about 2 tons
  of which 15 to 20 percent is water and which has the heating value of
  a ton of coal or 200 gallons of fuel oil.
